>> Do you know who owns your
NEIGBOURHOOD V8? What about the
dental clinic on the corner?
Private equity firms are buying
up businesses that generate
steady cash flow, and it has
some experts worried about
quality and competition.
To find out more, I spoke with
Rachel Wasserman, founder of
Wasserman Business Law and the
author of The Private Equity
Playbook How Buyout Firms
extract Rather Than Build Value
and What to Do about it.
Rachel, welcome to our studios.
How are you?
>> I'm good. Thanks for having
me.
>> All right. For our viewers
who are not financial experts,
break it down for us.
What is private equity?
How does it work?
>> So a very broad term that
can mean a lot of different
things to a lot of different
people. So let's start very
basic. So private equity is
really just investing money in
assets that are not publicly
traded. So not stocks or bonds
that you would see in the stock
market or the bond market.
So this is buying up private
assets. So real estate, private
companies, infrastructure
projects. There's nothing
inherently wrong about private
equity because, you know people
are saying private equity is
the big bad wolf right now. But
that's not true of the generic
private equity. Within private
equity, there are actors and
industries that invest in these
types of assets and have
specific a specific playbook of
how they make their money. And
within that are the critiques
of where things in the economy
perhaps aren't working as great
as they could be. And so within
private equity, there is an
industry of venture funds,
buyout funds, real estate funds
that are investing in the
economy. That is really just a
layer, a hidden layer up above
what we as consumers see as the
regular economy. It's ownership
of existing businesses, buyout.
>> That's one that we will be
delving into. It's one that
seems to be hitting the
headlines. We have seen over
the years a number of Canadian
businesses being bought up by
these private equity companies.
What types of businesses are we
looking at?
>> It's literally everything.
And so one that is quite
notable that we're hearing a
lot of in the news are buyouts
of professional practices.
So dentists, vets, massage
therapists, HVAC, like
effectively it's a playbook.
It's a playbook of how you can
extract value in economies of
scale and economies of scale.
And it gets deployed as
frequently as it's profitable.
And so really what we're seeing
is this consolidation of
entrepreneurship in the economy
for the purposes of building
value for other people. And so
there's a real change in the
economy, which is when I'm an
owner operator, someone owns a
business, I get to decide how
that business is run. Or maybe
it's a family business.
And my brothers and sisters
and cousins were on the board,
and we fight it out amongst
ourselves. But this is a new
layer being added on, which is
an increasing number of
businesses, a strong or a large
percentage of businesses are
now being run by people who are
in the business of making money
for other people.
So it it changes the mission of
the underlying--
It's not about the culture.
It's not about any of that.
>> It's about returning profits
to the investor.
So the best example I can give
in certification, am I allowed
to say that.
>> You've said it, you're good.
>> So in edification is this
concept of taking out the value
and raising prices where you're
just getting less value. And
this is a strategy that's been
deployed by the finance
industry in our economy,
where they're optimising
profitability. So if I can sell
a product and take some of the
goodness out of it and raise
prices in such a way that my
profit stays the same, the
decrease in revenue is balanced
by the decrease in expenses.
And so it's really not about
selling the best product
possible. It's about making as
much money as possible. And so
the it's really a perversion of
capitalism where we're putting
the needs of the investor ahead
of the business itself.
>> All right. I want to put the
lens of a private equity
company. I am looking and
surveying the Canadian business
landscape. What is a an
attractive business for someone
like me? If I am looking to buy?
>> Great question. Predictable
cash flow. That is what it
comes down to a safe bet.
So the reason why I'm not a fan
of these buyout funds, which is
a subset of the private equity
industry, these are it's called
buyout because they buy out the
whole company. And the reason
why I don't love this is
because of the massive amounts
of debt used to subsidise the
purchase price. So I'm going to
give a very simple example. So
if I'm going to buy a business
for $100 million, I'm only
putting down 20. And then the
business itself pays that out.
Now the problem with this is
that, you know, like asset
backed loans are not bad. It's
when they get used abusively
and systemically that we have
this problem. So an asset
backed loan is not bad. But we
have to think about what is the
opportunity cost of that asset
backed loan. And that means the
money that the business is
paying to subsidise the
purchase price from the
shareholders. So the business
gets no benefit from this loan.
It's not going into capital
expenditures. It's not
investing in the growth of the
business. It's just subsidising
the price for the shareholders.
So think of it as a pure burden
with no benefit. Running a
marathon with a cinderblock on
your back.
>> I have to imagine there are
regulatory alarm bells ringing
off because of all of these
sales that we are seeing has,
say, the Competition Bureau
gotten involved.
Are they looking into this?
>> They are looking into this,
but our laws are not
appropriate for what's going on
in the market right now.
Our you know, I spoke at the
competition summit a few weeks
ago. They are aware of what's
going on, but private equity
has been private for so long
that unfortunately, our
policymakers are only starting
to figure out what is going on
as we speak. And so, for
example, we have a bright line
test over a certain dollar
threshold. I think it's 93 or
96 million, $96 million, but we
don't track death by a thousand
cuts. So we don't see that
someone has bought 20 dental
practices in one year, because
if they all fall below that 93
or $96 million threshold,
there's very little, if any,
regulatory intervention. And so
we need to be more progressive
in terms of what's actually
going on, as opposed to just
setting bright lines and
waiting for them to be
triggered, because by the time
they grow into these beasts,
it's too late.
>> Now, some may argue and say
that private equity is needed.
There is a legitimate role for
it in our economy. Saves
businesses investments.
Is there a role for it?
>> Absolutely. There's a role
for it. In order to grow our
economy, we need to invest.
And that's something we don't
talk about enough investing
into businesses where they are
spending money in research
and development, in increasing
wages, in training. Growth
takes time, risk and investment,
and we're not going to be able
to grow the Canadian economy
without a little bit of pain.
You know, you can't go to the
gym and build muscle without
some work. Fair enough.
And I think that we have been
accustomed to just consistent
returns without that growth
period, without that loss
period for the growth to kick
in. And that's really what we
need to turn this economy
around. So we have a very
interesting perspective as
Canadians because not only are
we allowing foreigners to
plunder our economy, we are
doing the same thing to others.
>> Very quickly in about 30
seconds we have left,
why should Canadians care
that this is happening?
>> Everyone needs to care that
this is happening. This is the
future of not just our economy,
our political landscape, our
social landscape. This is the
consolidation of capital
happening behind the scenes.
This is the future of upward
mobility. This is the future of
equality. And if we don't care
and intervene, we will create
a society of have yachts
and have nots.
>> Rachel, we're going to leave
it there. Thank you so much.
Some food for thought for sure.
>> Thanks for having me.