>> Shopify is often celebrated
as a Canadian tech success
story. It was founded here, and
it's headquartered here. So are
CGI, Lightspeed and a handful
more. But why don't we have
more home-grown success stories?
No one doubts that we have the
talent, but the data shows that
tech founders are increasingly
leaving the country. So what
can we do to keep them here?
And what do we lose when they
go? Then on the flipside,
there are companies that are
increasingly setting up shop in
this country. You may not even
know it more and more local
businesses think about your vet
clinic, the dentists. They're
being snapped up by private
equity. Can you expect to see
the cost go up and quality go
down? This is The Rundown.
Canadian tech firms can face
challenges getting capital and
keeping talent. So what can we
do to help founders build
companies here at home?
Abdullah Snobar, the executive
director of DMZ, a tech
incubator at Toronto
Metropolitan University, and
Kelsey Hahn, the CEO of monarch,
a leadership development
platform, sat down with me to
explain. Abdullah Kelsey, thank
you so much for joining us on
The Rundown. I'm going to start
with you, Kelsey, which is the
bigger problem in Canada,
enticing people to begin
start-ups Or increasing the
size of existing ones?
>> I think for me there, I
would probably go with enticing
people to start companies.
I you know, I think part of what
we have in Canada right now is
a bit of an entrepreneurship
challenge. This country was
built on entrepreneurs.
If you think about it, we are
only most of us are only 1 or 2
generations removed from
parents or grandparents that
moved to this country and
started their own businesses.
And I, you know, what we've
seen over the last 20 years is
entrepreneurship rates have
been lowering. And so we have
approximately 100,000 less than
we did 20 years ago.
And yet over that same period,
our population has increased
drastically. And so I think,
you know, there's there's a
little bit of stigma in some
ways that comes with
entrepreneurship. You know,
in the US we celebrate
entrepreneurs, and it looks a
little bit more like a badge of
honour and experience.
And we celebrate failure.
And in Canada, you know, I can
speak for myself, but the you
know, the first thing I thought
when starting a company was, oh,
I'm going to have to move away
if I fail because I would lose,
you know, all my networks and
contacts. So yeah, I think for
me it's it's more of the
entrepreneurship piece.
>> Abdullah they're so
intertwined, to be honest with
you, that it's hard to kind of
pinpoint on one. I do agree
with Kelsey though. It is
becoming a bigger challenge for,
you know, to see the energy
that you need in a market that
needs to build the right
incentives to, to help
entrepreneurs kind of start an
idea and start a company here
in Canada. But truth be told,
once people build a company, I
think they quickly realise how
difficult it is to scale in
Canada, not because we're in a
small country only, but because
the conditions haven't been
created in a way that would
allow an entrepreneur to really
leverage the full extent of
what Canada has to offer.
And I know we can talk a lot
about these things, but three
areas that we really identified
as big challenges today. Number
one is, you know, how do you
take IP to commercialisation.
And that really gets back to
the question of how do you
really build really good
companies that have the
potential to become billion
dollar businesses in the future
by leveraging the insane amount
of dollars that we're putting
into research here in this
country, but not able to really
build the incentives to get
that research to commercial
reality. The second part is
around VC and just venture
capital dollars, and the amount
of money that can be supporting
the company's growth. In many
ways limited. I won't say
non-existent because that's not
true, but it's very limited in
a way that doesn't really feed
the entire funnel of of of of
need from a start-up
perspective, especially with
the amount of talent that we
have in Canada. And then
finally, I think the government
plays a big role in this,
actually, and being able to
shine a light on a lot of the
entrepreneurs and the founders
that are being supported
locally and globally. But then
it goes deeper into things like
procurement and even into
buying Canadian and putting
Canadians first.
>> Kelsey, there are some
companies, Canadian companies
that go to the US. Do we have
an idea of how many Canadian
tech firms are deciding to go
south of the border for maybe
greener pastures?
>> Yeah, I mean, look, I think
every Canadian founder starts
their company and probably one
of the first pieces of advice
they hear is get your product
to the US. I mean, that is the
playbook build. If you can
build your company, build your
talent inside of Canada and go
get your revenue outside of
Canada as soon as possible.
Validate beyond our borders.
And I think, you know, there's
some pros and cons to that, but
it's it's largely an issue of
market size. We know that
obviously there's just much
more opportunity there. But I
think when it comes to it kind
of goes back to my point around
productivity. There's also just
a willingness to adopt
technology faster. And so, you
know, you hear of these stories
where Canadian companies, you
know, there's one in Calgary
that has, I think over 90% of
their customer base comes from
the US, but they have over 100
employees headquartered in
Alberta. And so that's a common
story for many, many Canadian
start-ups.
>> Abdullah, you are in the
incubation space. There are
some very, you know, eager
people to build something. And
I imagine maybe if you can pick
up on the point where Kelsey
said is the playbook to go to
the US.
>> Look, we don't have an
innovation problem. We don't
have a talent problem.
We certainly don't have an
ambition problem in Canada.
We have we've built great
companies today. We've had an
incredible past where Canada
has been a leader on innovation.
In many ways. What we don't
have is the right
infrastructure and the right
incentives in place to allow
people to really, again, build
for, to their full extent while
being here in Canada. And what
I mean by that, when someone's
looking to expand and build
their company, they don't think
about going from Ontario to
Alberta or to BC or to Quebec.
They think about going south
because it actually is a lot of
hurdles and red tape that they
have to encounter by going
interprovincial that we don't
realise is a lost opportunity.
And this is part of the reality
that founders have to face. And
when you're building a company,
it's your livelihood. You will
do whatever it takes to keep
that company alive. And if it
means going south, that's what
you do. But there certainly
isn't a lack of, of, of of
ambition in what Canadians can
do here. And, and quite, quite
frankly, the need to to build
a business has to always be
thought of globally, where our
challenges come to come to come
to set right now is that
Canadians are leaving sometimes
the country to go build abroad.
That doesn't need to be the
case. Kelsey, as a good example
of that, can continue being in
Canada, being in her home,
building a global business,
hiring global talent, but
focusing her HQ here, right
here in Canada. That needs to
be the storyline that we
continue building moving
forward. Otherwise it's really
it's ours to lose. It's a story
that we have control of.
The narrative should be in our
favour, but you know, we're not
building the right blocks to,
to, to to go in that direction.
>> All right. I want to pick up
with Kelsey Abdullah. You
talked about inter-provincial
trade barriers. Kelsey, you are
based in Canada. I am curious,
what are the barriers? What are
those barriers that are maybe,
perhaps stopping you from
building in the US, if that is
something that you want to do?
>> Yeah. So honestly, we're an
AI based company. And so one of
the things we do is we we have
a leadership intelligence
product. So we analyse real
time meeting data from leaders
in their direct reports.
And then we turn that into
performance insights to help
them manage their lives more
easily. And so one of our
biggest challenges of course,
is security, risk compliance
and all of the different
standards, you know, across
Europe, the UK and the US,
which which vary, right, based
on where you are, the, you know,
the rules of note takers, what
kind of data you can keep,
where it is stored, how you use
that data highly varies.
So that would be one of the
biggest challenges as AI
companies navigate those
borders, which I think, you
know, I think that's probably
an acute problem. I think we're
going to see that all catch up
rapidly over the next couple of
years.
>> I want to stick with you,
Kelsey, because I want to talk
a little bit of let's talk
dollars. How much money do you
think you could raise if you
moved your company to the US?
Because correct me if I'm wrong,
is it a is it a 403 area code
in Calgary? Yes. Is there does
there is there a little
discrimination when we're
talking investors, when they
see maybe a 403 area code
versus maybe area code south of
the border?
>> Oh yeah. I mean, I think
that's one piece in investing
for sure. But no question as
well in selling, I think we get
obviously tons of inbound from
Canadian companies. And there
is an element of let's make
sure they don't see where to
Canadian because that would
signal maybe we move slower,
maybe we're a smaller team,
maybe we don't have clients in
the US. It you know, it just
signals the things that you
don't want a client to not get
you to that next meeting stage.
Yeah. And I have friends that.
Have you found her friends that
purposely buy and use different
area code numbers to make sure
that when they're cold calling
and doing their sales calls,
it doesn't appear that they're
coming from a Canadian number.
And so, yeah, lots of Canadian
Start-Ups know a little bit of
those tricks of the trade to
make sure that, you know, we
take some of that bias out of
either the sales or the
investment process.
>> Very good. Abdullah Kelsey
talked AI. So let's talk a
little bit about that. How much
harder is it for Canadian tech
firms to find funding right now
if their business is not
leveraged by AI?
>> Yeah. Look, we're in a
moment now where AI generative
AI is everything, right? So,
you know, a lot of the founders
and the companies have now
shifted their businesses to be
called either native AI
companies or AI enabled
businesses. It really is the
movement. But look, it needs
to be incorporated in some way,
shape, or form. And companies
are building deep technologies
and really thinking about the
future and what what's to come
are naturally just
incorporating AI into into
their, into their start-ups.
So it's not you know, it's no
longer a matter of is it
incorporated? It's a matter of
how how deep into the business
actually is it layered in, and
what are you doing with it to
create a differentiated product.
So it would certainly be
difficult to, you know, capture
the VC dollars, if you will,
without having that well
thought out. And but again,
Canada is has always been, you
know, at the forefront of this
space. And you know, something
that we should take pride in
the fact that we've helped
build some of the biggest
capabilities in the world from
an AI perspective and something
that we have such strength and,
and, and, and rigour with and
right here in our backyard in
Canada.
>> AI programming, we know, is
different than traditional
coding. Kelsey, do we have
enough AI graduates or
experienced coders who could
handle the demand that is out
there right now? Are you hiring
right now? Are you looking for
some programmers and coders?
>> Yeah. No, I mean always
hiring AI talent and trying to
keep them with us. You know, I
think we are lucky in Canada in
that this is an amazing place
to live, build a family,
incredible work life balance.
It's still obviously relatively
affordable, you know,
politically stable. And so we
do have other factors that can
attract people to come and set
up their lives. And I think for
many Start-Ups, we're holding
on to that, because if our
talent went south, we would not
be able to compete on the
salaries and the drop of our
dollar. And so we're just
becoming less and less
competitive. Do I think that we
have the talent here, and do I
think we can continue to
attract the talent? Absolutely.
But you know, AI developers and
I think no different than other
developers and engineers.
They want to work for big,
innovative companies that have
gumption. And so, you know,
that would be more of my call
to action is like, we need to
support these big companies to
Abdullah's point, like getting
past that or into that growth
stage because they want
exciting, meaty, challenging
problems. They want to solve
them. They're hungry, they're
very curious. And we need to
keep that talent here.
>> Well, let's talk incentives.
Abdullah, what incentives can
employers put out there to keep
people here in Canada?
>> Well, look, a lot of it
comes down to from my side,
I'm talking about particular
Start-Ups, you know, to keep
Start-Ups here in Canada and
want them to kind of continue
to grow and scale their
businesses. You need to build
maybe the two of the biggest
things that we know in the in
the South, in the US, that
they've done really well is
speed, scale and the ability to
actually procure government
contracts. If we're able to
figure out a model that would
push the the market here to
start being first to move, as
opposed to always be a follow a
follower in terms of what the
US is doing and how the US is
doing things, the ability to
actually remove some red tape
and the barriers that would
allow Canadians to scale within
their own backyard, from
province to province to
province, from market, and then
in particular to government.
And imagine for a day that
we're able to unlock the
biggest customer in the country
for founders to actually
leverage, so that when they go
abroad and start to to grow
their companies and hire the
best talent, they can start
with the position that our
biggest customer or one of our
biggest customers in the world
is the Canadian government or
the provincial government of
Ontario, of Alberta, of BC, of
Quebec. That in itself holds so
much weight that we haven't
been able to crack yet.
So I think those are some of the
big incentives that will beyond
what what, you know, Kelsey
mentioned around safety and
standard of living and
stability. You know, there
needs to be an entire cohesive
market that's opening up that
allows companies to see
themselves being able to build
a business that would actually
grow in scale. And it has to go
beyond the non-dilutive funding,
the grants that Canadians are
so well equipped to get.
But that in itself won't make us
the most competitive nation in
building what we want to build.
We need to create a market
that's that, you know, that has
speed, that's able to think
about scale across borders,
across provinces, across
countries, and then looking at
procurement from a government
perspective.
>> Kelsey, last question to you.
What are some of those
potential solutions to entice
tech firms to remain
headquartered in Canada?
>> Oh gosh. So many. I mean,
I think, of course, tax
incentives help. Of course, the
scientific research, the shred
program that the Canadian
government incentivises for R&D
is incredible. And we need more
incentives like that for
Canadian businesses around, you
know, Abdullah mentioned it.
Government contracts around
buying Canadian tech.
So tax credits, incentives to
encourage adoption pilots.
You know I think we have to face
it as Canadians. We do not we
inherently don't like risk,
which is unfortunate. Right?
We're we're kind of we always
have this cultural belief that
just we aren't good enough and
we aren't as good as the US.
And maybe our products aren't
as good, which is absolutely
not true. Our products are as
good, if not better. And so
we're always looking for that
external validation.
And I think we need to be the
champion of our own
entrepreneurs. We need to dig
in to what started this country,
and we need to champion and
support the incredible ideas
and innovation ecosystem that
we are building here.
And that is not just tech in and
of itself. It goes beyond the
tech borders. Right?
That's to Abdullah's point.
From universities, ecosystem
partners, government and
private businesses, other small
to medium enterprises in Canada.
>> Kelsey Abdullah, thank you
so much. Really appreciate your
insights.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> Do you know who owns your
NEIGBOURHOOD V8? What about the
dental clinic on the corner?
Private equity firms are buying
up businesses that generate
steady cash flow, and it has
some experts worried about
quality and competition.
To find out more, I spoke with
Rachel Wasserman, founder of
Wasserman Business Law and the
author of The Private Equity
Playbook How Buyout Firms
extract Rather Than Build Value
and What to Do about it.
Rachel, welcome to our studios.
How are you?
>> I'm good. Thanks for having
me.
>> All right. For our viewers
who are not financial experts,
break it down for us.
What is private equity?
How does it work?
>> So a very broad term that
can mean a lot of different
things to a lot of different
people. So let's start very
basic. So private equity is
really just investing money in
assets that are not publicly
traded. So not stocks or bonds
that you would see in the stock
market or the bond market.
So this is buying up private
assets. So real estate, private
companies, infrastructure
projects. There's nothing
inherently wrong about private
equity because, you know people
are saying private equity is
the big bad wolf right now. But
that's not true of the generic
private equity. Within private
equity, there are actors and
industries that invest in these
types of assets and have
specific a specific playbook of
how they make their money. And
within that are the critiques
of where things in the economy
perhaps aren't working as great
as they could be. And so within
private equity, there is an
industry of venture funds,
buyout funds, real estate funds
that are investing in the
economy. That is really just a
layer, a hidden layer up above
what we as consumers see as the
regular economy. It's ownership
of existing businesses, buyout.
>> That's one that we will be
delving into. It's one that
seems to be hitting the
headlines. We have seen over
the years a number of Canadian
businesses being bought up by
these private equity companies.
What types of businesses are we
looking at?
>> It's literally everything.
And so one that is quite
notable that we're hearing a
lot of in the news are buyouts
of professional practices.
So dentists, vets, massage
therapists, HVAC, like
effectively it's a playbook.
It's a playbook of how you can
extract value in economies of
scale and economies of scale.
And it gets deployed as
frequently as it's profitable.
And so really what we're seeing
is this consolidation of
entrepreneurship in the economy
for the purposes of building
value for other people. And so
there's a real change in the
economy, which is when I'm an
owner operator, someone owns a
business, I get to decide how
that business is run. Or maybe
it's a family business.
And my brothers and sisters
and cousins were on the board,
and we fight it out amongst
ourselves. But this is a new
layer being added on, which is
an increasing number of
businesses, a strong or a large
percentage of businesses are
now being run by people who are
in the business of making money
for other people.
So it it changes the mission of
the underlying--
It's not about the culture.
It's not about any of that.
>> It's about returning profits
to the investor.
So the best example I can give
in certification, am I allowed
to say that.
>> You've said it, you're good.
>> So in edification is this
concept of taking out the value
and raising prices where you're
just getting less value. And
this is a strategy that's been
deployed by the finance
industry in our economy,
where they're optimising
profitability. So if I can sell
a product and take some of the
goodness out of it and raise
prices in such a way that my
profit stays the same, the
decrease in revenue is balanced
by the decrease in expenses.
And so it's really not about
selling the best product
possible. It's about making as
much money as possible. And so
the it's really a perversion of
capitalism where we're putting
the needs of the investor ahead
of the business itself.
>> All right. I want to put the
lens of a private equity
company. I am looking and
surveying the Canadian business
landscape. What is a an
attractive business for someone
like me? If I am looking to buy?
>> Great question. Predictable
cash flow. That is what it
comes down to a safe bet.
So the reason why I'm not a fan
of these buyout funds, which is
a subset of the private equity
industry, these are it's called
buyout because they buy out the
whole company. And the reason
why I don't love this is
because of the massive amounts
of debt used to subsidise the
purchase price. So I'm going to
give a very simple example. So
if I'm going to buy a business
for $100 million, I'm only
putting down 20. And then the
business itself pays that out.
Now the problem with this is
that, you know, like asset
backed loans are not bad. It's
when they get used abusively
and systemically that we have
this problem. So an asset
backed loan is not bad. But we
have to think about what is the
opportunity cost of that asset
backed loan. And that means the
money that the business is
paying to subsidise the
purchase price from the
shareholders. So the business
gets no benefit from this loan.
It's not going into capital
expenditures. It's not
investing in the growth of the
business. It's just subsidising
the price for the shareholders.
So think of it as a pure burden
with no benefit. Running a
marathon with a cinderblock on
your back.
>> I have to imagine there are
regulatory alarm bells ringing
off because of all of these
sales that we are seeing has,
say, the Competition Bureau
gotten involved.
Are they looking into this?
>> They are looking into this,
but our laws are not
appropriate for what's going on
in the market right now.
Our you know, I spoke at the
competition summit a few weeks
ago. They are aware of what's
going on, but private equity
has been private for so long
that unfortunately, our
policymakers are only starting
to figure out what is going on
as we speak. And so, for
example, we have a bright line
test over a certain dollar
threshold. I think it's 93 or
96 million, $96 million, but we
don't track death by a thousand
cuts. So we don't see that
someone has bought 20 dental
practices in one year, because
if they all fall below that 93
or $96 million threshold,
there's very little, if any,
regulatory intervention. And so
we need to be more progressive
in terms of what's actually
going on, as opposed to just
setting bright lines and
waiting for them to be
triggered, because by the time
they grow into these beasts,
it's too late.
>> Now, some may argue and say
that private equity is needed.
There is a legitimate role for
it in our economy. Saves
businesses investments.
Is there a role for it?
>> Absolutely. There's a role
for it. In order to grow our
economy, we need to invest.
And that's something we don't
talk about enough investing
into businesses where they are
spending money in research
and development, in increasing
wages, in training. Growth
takes time, risk and investment,
and we're not going to be able
to grow the Canadian economy
without a little bit of pain.
You know, you can't go to the
gym and build muscle without
some work. Fair enough.
And I think that we have been
accustomed to just consistent
returns without that growth
period, without that loss
period for the growth to kick
in. And that's really what we
need to turn this economy
around. So we have a very
interesting perspective as
Canadians because not only are
we allowing foreigners to
plunder our economy, we are
doing the same thing to others.
>> Very quickly in about 30
seconds we have left,
why should Canadians care
that this is happening?
>> Everyone needs to care that
this is happening. This is the
future of not just our economy,
our political landscape, our
social landscape. This is the
consolidation of capital
happening behind the scenes.
This is the future of upward
mobility. This is the future of
equality. And if we don't care
and intervene, we will create
a society of have yachts
and have nots.
>> Rachel, we're going to leave
it there. Thank you so much.
Some food for thought for sure.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> And that's it for The
Rundown. What do you want to
see on the next show?
Email us at therundown@tvo.org
or reach out to me on Instagram
@jeyanjeganathan. Tell me about
the topics that matter to you
and what you think is working
or not working so far. Because
Ontario, this is your show.
See you next week.