>> Remember the early days of
Covid when people would wait
impatiently for the latest news
conference from Ontario's Chief
Medical Officer of health?
Maybe that was just me, but the
pandemic pushed public health
agencies into the spotlight
and now, over five years later,
we might not be waiting
breathlessly for public health
updates anymore. But that
spotlight has never really gone
away, especially with the
return of things like measles.
I wanted to know more about
the pressures public health
agencies are facing. So I sat
down with Dr. Trevor Arnason,
medical officer of health at
Ottawa Public Health.
Dr. Arnison, thank you so much
for joining us on the program.
You are officially three months
into your new position as
Ottawa's medical officer of
health. Congratulations on that.
Let's talk about public health
and its role. Let's talk 2025.
I'm sure there are standard
practices that you have to
employ just across the board.
But I am curious are there any
new approaches? Having looked
at the last couple of years
coming off the heels of Covid
into a measles outbreak, but is
there any new approaches just
in general, when we talk about
public health on the local
level that you want to sort of
play to?
>> So we are we are going
through a renewal of the
Ontario public Health standards
in Ontario. So this is the
provincial standards that guide
our work and what we do.
I think for me, what's top of
mind in the past few months
starting this new rule is how
information and the information
space is really affecting how
people are approaching health
issues. My background working
as an associate medical officer
of health has largely been in
vaccinations and being involved
in the Covid 19 vaccination
rollout. We're seeing a lot of
misinformation around vaccines,
but also other all other health
related issues and and
treatments. There's a lot of
information being shared on the
internet right now and in
social media.
>> Well, let's pick up on
the misinformation and
disinformation. Help me
understand when you are around
the table with your colleagues
trying to figure out the proper
messaging, how are you cutting
through the noise?
>> Yeah, so a lot of it is
related to basic communications
approaches. A lot of it is
trying to understand where
people are getting their
information and how best we can
speak to people so that they
that we're listening and seen
as a a trusted partner.
We've seen a lot of mistrust and
and lack of trust for from
traditional government
institutions on on issues like
vaccination. And similarly,
we see that people less and less
have access to a trusted
healthcare provider in Ontario
who they can speak to about
issues at the individual level.
So what we've been trying to do
is engage the community and
understand what some of the
barriers are to getting the
appropriate information.
>> Now, you had mentioned your
background. You were also part
of Ottawa's Covid 19 task force.
Also very important to note
that around that time in 2022,
Ottawa was being occupied.
There was a convoy that was
downtown quite busy.
And I imagine part of the
messaging is also understanding
who you are sort of fighting
against or trying to, you know,
where those other messages are
coming from.
And I'm curious, who do you
point the finger at for some of
the misinformation and
disinformation around vaccine
hesitancy for example?
>> You know, I've been working
in the vaccine space for for a
very long time, and I, I would
I would be hesitant to actually
say that a lot of the. Myths
around vaccination have have
changed substantially over the
past few decades. Even if we go
back to the, you know, 1800s.
And when vaccines started, a
lot of the same concerns about
vaccines that are raised today
are similar. So the the. The
real difference in our society,
I think, is where people are
getting their information and
how the information is flowing
and who's being seen as trusted
voices of information and what
the motivations behind
misinformation and
disinformation is.
>> Dr. Arneson, very quickly,
I do want to pivot a little bit
about measles for last year.
That was the focus. And, you
know, there was hope that
Ontario had it under control.
But there were two cases that
were discovered in Ottawa,
and I am curious about the
conversation around exemptions,
whether it's religious,
philosophical, is that
worsening the vaccine hesitancy?
Is that adding fuel to the fire?
>> So certainly vaccine
hesitancy is the is is a cause
of what we're seeing, the issue
around people choosing not to
vaccinate for measles, mumps,
rubella is certainly a cause of
why we're seeing people with
measles and spread of measles
within the province. Now, what
we're seeing is that people are
not familiar with the disease
and in many cases are not
getting vaccinated. And that's
a number of a number of factors.
It's not always related to
specific religious beliefs.
Again, it could be related to
misinformation that people are
hearing through social media
or other other forms of
communication. And it could
also be, in some cases, access
issues when it comes to
exemptions. What we're talking
about is in Ontario, the
Immunisation of School Pupils
Act, which is an act for
reporting vaccines to attend
school, which is an important
tool in in trying to make sure
that people are up to date.
But it's it's not necessarily a
perfect tool. People can choose
those exemptions.
We haven't seen massive
increases in exemptions.
However, you know, we do see
challenges with people being
able to report their records
year over year and especially
during the pandemic when school
was disrupted for periods of
time and getting that
information and also people's
access to healthcare services
were disrupted.
We did see a decrease in in
vaccination of some of these
important immunisations that
we're still seeing
catch up with. So really the
the fundamental issue is
getting people to understand
the importance of routine
vaccination and getting the
vaccinations. And there's a
variety of, of, of barriers or
reasons that that might not be
happening as much as it once
was.
>> We are going to leave it
there. Dr. Arneson, really
appreciate your time and your
input.
>> Thanks very much.