How many countries have we have
we marked?
How many countries?
>> I never did, I never counted
them all up. But sometimes I'll
hear a story from and I'll
realise, my gosh, I was there,
I think. And it was, it was, it
was I.
>> Brian, thank you so much for
having us in your lovely home.
How are you doing?
>> Oh, great. Thank you and my
pleasure to have you here.
>> You write having a Canadian
passport meant something
looking just through your press
passes. Just seeing the word
Canada felt like there was some
power to it. Do you think it
holds the same sway.
>> In some areas?
It does.
Canada is still a respected
country, though. I think it's
fallen. It's still in the top
ten of most respected countries,
and that can really be very,
very helpful for Canadians and
Canada. And certainly the
government's hoping it will be
very helpful as it looks for
new trading partners. But it
doesn't have that same that
same clout that it used to have
when it was very big in
peacekeeping, very big in
foreign aid. There was a period
in the '80s.
Canadians may be surprised by
this now, but we were often
referred to as the Samaritan
state, the state that always
wanted to be out there helping
others.
And that gave us a kind of a
entrance over and over
on the ground.
Even when I was working with the
Americans, I could say, let's
go the Canadian Embassy. I
think they'll be able to get us
in where the American Embassy
couldn't, you know, because of
various suspicions or what have
you. So I had many reasons to
really appreciate that Canadian
clout before. I think we have
wonderful people abroad. And I
have to underscore that. I
think our reporters that are
abroad now are as good as any
in history, and I think we
still have some extremely good
diplomats, but we have to
rebuild the strength, you know,
more better, more bureaus and
more more logistical support
all the way through.
>> I want to pick up on the
Samaritan state. I think we're
looking on the inside out. We
can be critical of ourselves
and be extra critical. I'm
curious, what do other
countries do you think view us
as?
>> I think other countries,
from what I gather, you know,
tend to feel that we, we, we
own the podium in a kind of
non-sports way, a non
swaggering way, but in a kind
of diplomatic, friendly way.
And we sort of stepped down
from that podium and were
content to go for bronze again.
You know, there was a time when
Canadian Sports Canada was
known as the bronze medal
nation, right?
Well, we're not anymore.
We're up there often for
gold and silvers and all that.
Well, the same way with
in our journalism and our
diplomacy and the rest of it,
we really were did manage to
get on the podium in the '80s
and '90s through that period and
then gave a lot of it up. So
they think that for a period we
lost focus. We seem to be a
hard country to read. We didn't
seem to have a coherent message
quite often, or we would have a
bumper sticker slogan as a
message and people say, well,
what does that mean, really?
What are you actually going to
give?
What kind of people are you
going to send abroad?
How come you used to have, you
know, 1200 peacekeepers
in the world?
Now you've got 25, right?
I mean, at some stage it becomes
almost a little bit laughable.
Now, having said that, I think
there's a big change in the
Canadian mood that I feel in
the last year. And I think
Canada Canadians want to get
back and know they have to get
back. I really think is very
important. It's not just a wish
to be well-liked. It's a wish
to be influential again, to be
able to be. At the signing of
documents. Notice Canada wanted
to fly into Egypt for the
signing of the cease fire
agreement over Gaza. It you
know, our Prime Minister phoned
up and said, I want to come to
be there. I'm not sure we would
have done that before. So I
think there's much more of
Canada taking a we're in centre
stage again role. And I'm very
impressed by the amount of
media coverage Canada tends to
get now in the last six months
or so. Over that before.
>> How OSAP, I suppose?
>> Yes. Well, that was even
though the elbows aren't quite
as high up as they were. And
yeah.
>> There are places around the
world that got lost in the news
cycle and we can kind of talk
about how inundated people are
with headlines just because of
technology. But what are your
thoughts on what could be done
to help bring attention to
places that are not getting
well?
>> I think I think, first of
all, networks have to be
guilted back into realising,
you know, what you're doing is
ridiculous. I mean, I'll give
you one horrible example that
Ethiopia fell back into a civil
war in recent years for about
three year period when it's
estimated that somewhere
between half a million and
600,000 people died. That's
more people than died in Gaza
and Ukraine combined, yet got
almost no coverage in the media.
Very, very little coverage
except in maybe the British and
Al Jazeera and English and the
French gave it more coverage.
But basically we've turned
we've just gone away from
covering stories because they
seem complex, more costly to go
there. And how would you
support a team in the field?
We don't do front line coverage
in wars like Ukraine anymore,
because the insurance is so
high, and so we were sort of
backing off, covering a lot of
areas of the world. We don't
cover Latin America nearly as
much as we were doing so 20
years ago. This needs to be
explained more, but I think the
networks have to be somewhat
guilted back and guilt
themselves back. And I'm hoping
that this, this whole era we're
going into now where Canada is
really realising we're not just
Canada, US in terms of
importance, we're Canada and a
lot of other countries that we
better get to know about much
more than we do and have been
reporting on in recent years.
And we're scandalously unaware,
really. You know, the big
picture in India or Indonesia,
Latin America, Africa. I don't
think there's a single Canadian
broadcast correspondent in
Africa at the moment, which is
just crazy. So that would help
it. And then then putting the
resources into the coverage,
making the coverage good and
interesting, which foreign news
tends to be. And then at the
base itself, you need
experienced people able to
interpret what's going on in a
lesson. It's always a crisis
mode.
>> Do you think people are
tired or overwhelmed by seeing
images?
Oh yeah. And do you think there
might be reason to?
Why? Maybe.
>> I think that is a massive
problem. I worried even back in
1984, all those years ago, that
the images we were sending out,
at what point would people just
say, you know, I don't want to
live with these kind of images,
you know, I want a better
peaceful images and I can't
fault them, you know?
I mean, there are certain times
when I'm watching images of
coverage from afar where I just
I think I'll miss that tonight.
I'll watch something else.
It's understandable.
It's human nature.
I don't know what.
I don't know what the answer
to that is, except to put more
reporting and less of the image
in, like, you know, I think
longer stand ups by experienced
reporters in the field that are
less the vivid images, but more
the verbal explanation, longer
interviews with people who know
what they're talking about. And
there are so many of those, I
mean, they're always good
experts. Wherever you go in the
world, those things can be more
compelling at times than the
endless images of problems. And
the other thing that I think is
critically important. One
lesson I learned in Ethiopia
was of a very old Irish priest,
came up to me in a feeding
centre and said, you know, you
media are just wonderful at
coming into crises. You run in,
you do three days of footage
and then you fly away again and
you don't come back and we have
to stay on afterwards, of
course. And the world gets an
image that this was a hopeless
country of hopeless people who
never managed to get off their
knees. And you create this
wrong impression of complete
devastation. You're not around
to see people NEIGHBOURS come
back together. Schools reopen,
people form alliances and start
helping each other. You miss
that. So I went back to CBC and
said, you know, he has a real
point, and I think CBC's duty
must be to go back and do
recovery stories a great deal.
And they did. Said they started
to send me back almost every
two years to Ethiopia, where I
could focus on the kind of
things that gave people
encouragement to realise, you
know, these horrible scenes
you're seeing. They need not be
the same scenes six months from
now. If the world responds and
the country is given a chance.
That's why, in a way, I have to
say I'm rather old now. I look
forward to seeing the
rebuilding of Gaza, you know,
not just because it's the most
wrecked place I've ever seen on
Earth, but it's a place that
will show that people can, with
the proper help, come back as
they do come back from so many
places.
>> I want to pick up on Gaza.
Like we've mentioned, you have
been witness to some of the
biggest moments in history.
What do you make of the current
moment that we are in right now?
>> Well, I think we have a
ceasefire. We don't have a
peace agreement. We have a
ceasefire agreement. You could
say it's a small step, but, you
know, all peace treaties begin.
Small people say, oh, well,
it's only a small element. Well,
you have to start somewhere.
And that small element can
become the key building block
down the road. So I try to be
hopeful because I've seen
wonderful, hopeful stories. I
don't want to give people the
impression I've only seen
misery in life. I've seen a lot
of wonderful recovery and new
beginnings life. And, you know,
I think back even to my
childhood as a young child with
Europe recovering from the
Second World War, people do
recover. So I think there's a
lot of difficulty now to go on
to the next phase, the
intervention force. What's it
going to be made of?
Who's going to volunteer to go
into that?
How are you going to bring
a Palestinian Authority
into work with that
intervention force?
How are you going to get Hamas
to disarm?
How are you going to get the
Israelis to fully pull back all
these stage by stage things
that that need a lot of push
and pressure?
And the good thing I feel
what I think is essential is
that finally, all the countries
around are saying, that's it,
we've had it.
This has to stop.
And, you know, it was
very interesting that session
in Egypt when 20 leaders
of nations got together,
because I think that's going
to be needed.
Pressure can maintained
on Israel, pressure maintained
on Hamas as well, that you've
got to disarm.
You've got to leave government.
>> Brian, I have one question
left for you. I know you are
retired now, but clearly you
are not that far removed from
what's happening in the world.
But I have to ask, with all the
images that you have seen, that
you have reported on, when you
go to bed, when you close your
eyes, is there an image that
sticks with you?
>> The image I always fall
asleep to is the shelter people
or myself coming to a warm
shelter and my sound machine?
I have rain outside so they're
coming in from a scary
situation, or a rainy situation
or a turbulent situation, but
they're finding peace and
shelter inside. And I think the
fact that millions of people
can be brought to peace,
shelter and calm can be brought
out of their own nightmares is
something that kind of inspires
me all the time to maintain an
interest in the world.
Otherwise I would have given up.
But boy, I've seen a lot of
evil people in my life, but
also a lot of saints. A lot of
magnificent, heroic people I
write about. And that's what I
like to fall asleep to, is that
comforting image of there's a
shelter in the world for
everybody, right?
>> Thank you so much. I really
appreciate that.
>> Thank you very much.