>> Prime Minister Mark Carney
said it again last week.
Canada's old relationship with
the United States is over. We
saw just how true that was when
US President Donald Trump later
announced he was calling off
trade negotiations. Why?
Because Ontario ran an
anti-tariff ad for American
viewers. And not just any ad
one featuring Ronald Reagan.
And because Ontario didn't
immediately pull it off the air,
even running it during the
World Series, Trump said he'd
be slapping us with an
additional 10% tariff. It sure
seems like the only thing
that's certain here is
uncertainty, and the fact that
Canada will have to chart a new
course. That means asking some
big questions and making some
bigger decisions like who to
trade with, who to strengthen
ties with, what our role is in
the world. Who are we on the
global stage?
If the US is no longer our
closest ally and partner?
Welcome to The Rundown.
Canada was once known as a
peacekeeping nation, but that
reputation has faded in the age
of Trump's America. What part
should we play?
I asked former Canadian
Ambassador to the UN, Louise
Blais and journalist
Stephen Marche, host of the
podcast Gloves Off. Madame Blay.
Stephen, thank you so much for
joining us on the program.
Madame, I'm going to come to
you first. How is Canada
perceived by other nations
right now?
>> Well, I mean, it's it's it's
not universal, right?
Obviously there are some
countries, but that will have
different opinions.
But I think I travel
quite a bit internationally.
And at the moment there's a
little bit of a question mark
that's being raised. You know,
when I'm in Mexico, for example,
I hear, well, how are things
going over there?
I mean, so I think around the
world at the moment, it has
been noticed that this
relationship that we used to
benefit from with our our
closest ally and neighbour,
the United States of America,
has really fallen off a cliff.
I mean, I think the level of
which we are now in a
uncomfortable position in our
relationship, I think is
something that is definitely
seen and it's not brand new. I
think, you know, we have
disagreed in the past on a lot
of international issues, but
this kind of level, I think,
and the nature of it, like the
ad, for example, that is really
that is really making the
rounds around the world. So we
have to wait and see what that
means. Canada benefited
internationally from our
closeness to the Americans. Can
we stand on our own?
Are we an alternative to the
Americans for the world? I am
unconvinced of that.
But Stephen might have a
different, different opinion.
>> Well, Stephen, Canada has
long been considered a middle
power, even with our elbows up
sort of mantra. I am curious,
is that still the case? Are
we still a middle power in this?
>> Well, I think we're sort of
exiting the world where there
are such things as middle
powers. I mean, even even the
concept of a middle power
implies a multilateral world
order that simply has stopped
existing. You know, as to the
question of whether Canada has
to can stand by itself. I mean,
simple answer is it's going to
have to because, you know,
whatever our actions, the
actions of America or the
actions of a power hostile to
us and a power that is
certainly no longer reliable
either as an ally or a trading
partner. So, you know, I don't
think we're in a situation that
we have control over, and I
don't think we're in a
situation where we should judge
our politicians as if they had
control over it. We're just
reacting to the breakdown of
the United States as a world,
as a world power, and
ultimately as a nation and, and
and surviving that collapse,
that American collapse is the
task of the next generation of
Canadians.
>> All right. Madame Blay had
mentioned the ad. I think it's
important that we show that ad.
This is an ad that was pulled.
President Trump had called off
all trade talks because of this
ad that was placed by the
Ontario government. Let's have
a watch the clip here.
>> When someone says, let's
impose tariffs on foreign
imports, it looks like they're
doing the patriotic thing by
protecting American products
and jobs throughout the world.
There's a growing realisation
that the way to prosperity for
all nations is rejecting
protectionist legislation and
promoting fair and free
competition. America's jobs and
growth are at stake.
>> I am sure both of you have
probably watched that ad a few
times. So I'm going to ask
Madame Blay, was that the right
play?
>> No, I don't think it was at
all. And for a couple of
reasons. First of all, I mean,
using a previous president's
words against the current
president and the kind of
relationship that we're in
right now, I think is was
extremely dangerous. It was
very imprudent. And I don't
think we'd like it if it was
done to us. And so I think that
was point number one. Point
number two is one AD is not
going to change even if it is
being played in red states.
It's not going to change the
reality. There's been a debate
going on about trade and
tariffs in the United States
that's been raging. It does not
need this ad. And this ad is
not going to change hearts and
minds to the degree that it
would need to in order to
really outweigh the risk. And
the risk have been clear. And
and I think I we feel
comfortable as Canadians to do
that. And we go on their
airwaves and we take every
opportunity we have to try to
give them our opinion. And I
think that's fine to give them
our opinion, but I think we
should be very careful to step
into the political fray in the
United States at a time where
there is quite a bit of, of, of
division and not be caught
because we're going to get
caught in the middle. And
that's exactly what happened.
>> All right, Stephen, your
thoughts on the ad and a
response to Madame Blay?
>> Well, there's no real way to
tell if it was a good play or
right play because you're
dealing with a psychopath, like
how you deal with a, you know,
a meth head on the subway, like
there's no rational pro or
counter move that makes sense,
right?
As for, like whether Canada
should be interfering in
American politics, we need to
get very we need to start
interfering in American
politics very, very
aggressively. I mean, they are
open for business. They're very
clear that the Chinese and the
Russians are buying their
politicians. I mean, left,
right and centre. They
themselves. I mean, look what
they just did in Argentina,
like they interfere with
sovereign states politics all
the time. And our national
interest is absolutely,
intimately bound up in
interfering in American
politics. So we are going to be
interfering in American
politics if we want to survive.
You know, that's not something
we have a choice about. That is
something that is simply part
of the world that we're
entering now.
>> Madam Blay, with that, do we
need to try to build this
relationship?
That's what what I'm gathering
from you.
Or do we need to work on
other relationships?
>> Well, this is where, you
know, I kind of disagree a
little bit with with with
Stephen. With all due respect,
I don't think the United States
is collapsing, I really don't.
And if they are, then, you know,
God help us as well. No, I
think I think there are issues
going on down south of the
border. But at the same time,
nothing is going to change the
fact that our prosperity will
be tied to that of the
Americans for the foreseeable
future, no matter what we do.
And so we need to fix the
relationship there. And we've
gone about it, I think, the
wrong way. We say one thing to
the president. We play nice
when we're in the Oval Office,
but then we come home or we go
around the world and we say,
well, you know, we don't want
to deal with anyone that's not
reliable and we're looking for
other partners. You can't do
that. You have to be consistent
and you have to not be seen to
be two faced. That is what the
president, I think, accused
Prime Minister Trudeau of doing.
You've got to build a
relationship. Look, the
president is all over Asia
signing deals and and the
Japanese of all countries who
are set in their ways are
actually finding a way to work
with this president, turning
the page live in the real world,
live in the world that we are
in now and actually getting
something out of it. We cannot
continue to have this
uncertainty. We're paying the
price now. Time is money, and I
think we're going to have to
find a way back to the
negotiation table. And I have
to be realistic, and then we'll
move on from there. But I do
agree that things have changed,
and we do need to look to other
markets in addition to that,
the United States. But we first
have to fix the relationship
there, and that will actually
help us internationally,
because if we ask countries
around the world to make a
choice between us and Canada
and the United States, well,
the size of the US market is
simply too big.
>> Stephen, I'll.
>> Get to take.
>> Obviously, one thing is
clear things are not the same,
but the way that we go about it,
I gather, is a little different.
>> What's the point in
negotiating with a pirate?
I mean, any time that we come to
an agreement, they'll just rip
it up in the next five minutes.
We're dealing with we're not
dealing with the America that
we knew. We are dealing with an
authoritarian state that is
explicitly talked about
annexing us, which I mean, Her
Excellency really does not seem
to have processed like we're we
are dealing with a threat to
our security and to our
sovereignty from the South, and
the idea that we should just
roll over and take it, and
suddenly they'll come to their
senses and treat us like the
good little boys and girls that
we are. If we just behave is
laughable, like they they will
take, they will take every
advantage they can. That's
exactly what they've done. The
more vulnerable that we are,
the more they will take. We are
not dealing with people who can
be treated as reasonable human
beings with with reasonable
goals. We are dealing with
people who are annexationists
are in the middle of a a
breakdown. So like that we do
not have good choices. Like I
totally agree with that. But
the idea that we're going to go
back and we're going to somehow
come to some kind of
arrangement if we just behave,
this is the Canadian spirit
that has actually got us into
this mess. We need to
understand that the only
response that will get any
respect from authoritarians
like Trump is one of great,
great aggression. And that is
that is that is that is clear
from every country that has
ever lived beside an
authoritarian society. Finland
doesn't try to make peace and
make good with Russia. They
they come to their own
arrangements and they make
deals with other people. And
that is the world that we're in.
I wish we weren't. I wish we
were in the world where
Americans were reasonable human
beings we could talk to, but
we're not.
>> Very good. Madam, let's get
you in here. If that is the
case that Stephen is painting
right there, how does Canada
maintain its middle power?
If we have a tenuous
relationship with the US
as it is?
>> Well, I, I don't know that
the goal is to maintain or
middle.
>> What is what is the goal?
>> Well, the goal is to
actually, you know, and that I
totally agree. I mean, Canada's
global interests are really
twofold. One is, is our
economic security and the other
one is security. Security. So
both of them are fundamental.
We need to bring back our
foreign policy on on those. We
have a, you know, borders to
defend and we have an economy
to build. So I think we should
be focusing on that going
around the world and saying
we're a middle power. I just
don't see the point of that. I
think at the moment we have to
be I agree with Stephen. We
have to be realistic. This is a
difficult, tough, tough world,
and Canada benefited from the
genteel universe that we used
to live in. It's not like that
anymore. I think I'm a lot more
worried about what could happen
in the Arctic than I am on the
southern border. Quite frankly,
I we we do have a we're very
close to, to Russia, just like
Finland. And, and China has
already expressed their, their
interest in the Arctic. They've
already mapped the seafloor. So
I think we have to be very,
very clear that we need to
focus on us, need to focus on
our own well-being. And that
doesn't mean we completely
abandon human rights. But I
don't think we need to be the
saviour of the world. I think
at the moment we should focus
our energy on us.
>> If we are not the Saviour,
then Stephen, what should
Canada's role in the world be
right now?
>> Oh, I don't think we should
have a role in the world. I
think we should concentrate
entirely on our own survival. I
think that is our own priority.
The idea that we're going to be
global citizens and like, you
know, sort of the virtuous, you
know, the virtuous child at the
at the adult table of, of
global politics that that
should end. Like what we need
to concentrate right now is on
our material security, survival,
survival. I mean, we have
massive gaps in our national
infrastructure. I mean, Madame
Blay brought up the Arctic. I
mean, I could not agree more.
Like priority one, all other
priorities rescinded. But, you
know, we don't have an
effective security service
security apparatus for our
national interest. We don't
have an effective military that
can protect us from from actual,
you know, annexationist forces.
These are the priorities that
we need to focus on, not, you
know, the multilateral world
that we came from and that, of
course, we feel most
comfortable in and that God
knows I wish we were back in.
But, you know, I think in the
at least in the short to medium
term, but probably for the next
couple of decades, our own
survival as a democracy, as a
multicultural democracy, and as
a society in which education
and and the values that we have
aspired to can be maintained.
That needs to be our priority.
>> All right, Madam Blay, you
get the last 30 seconds.
What does that role look like
for Canada right now?
>> Well, I do agree. I think I
think in a sense we have to be
careful not to. I hear a lot of
issues about a coalition of the
willing and all of this. I, I
just don't see it. And we've
heard things like Canada should
join the EU. Look, we're not
European. And I, most Europeans
I speak to don't think this is
even feasible. So no, I don't
think we should look to join
another club or create another
club. I think we should really
focus on where we are. I think
there are alliances that we can
build, there's no doubt about
that. And we can continue to be
reliable partners around the
world. We need to look to
markets, but I don't think we
need to look for a, a policing
role or or trying to replace
the United States as, as the
beacon of democratic values. I
think that that would be very
difficult to achieve and also
very dangerous. So I think
instead of of virtue signalling,
let's focus on our interests.
>> Well, we are going to leave
it there, Madame Bley. Stephen,
thank you very much for your
time and your insights. For
decades. Brian Stewart reported
from war zones and interviewed
heads of state experiences
captured in his new book, On
the Ground My Life as a Foreign
Correspondent. He has a unique
perspective on Canada and how
it's perceived internationally.
So what does he think about our
place in the world?
How many countries have we have
we marked?
How many countries?
>> I never did, I never counted
them all up. But sometimes I'll
hear a story from and I'll
realise, my gosh, I was there,
I think. And it was, it was, it
was I.
>> Brian, thank you so much for
having us in your lovely home.
How are you doing?
>> Oh, great. Thank you and my
pleasure to have you here.
>> You write having a Canadian
passport meant something
looking just through your press
passes. Just seeing the word
Canada felt like there was some
power to it. Do you think it
holds the same sway.
>> In some areas?
It does.
Canada is still a respected
country, though. I think it's
fallen. It's still in the top
ten of most respected countries,
and that can really be very,
very helpful for Canadians and
Canada. And certainly the
government's hoping it will be
very helpful as it looks for
new trading partners. But it
doesn't have that same that
same clout that it used to have
when it was very big in
peacekeeping, very big in
foreign aid. There was a period
in the '80s.
Canadians may be surprised by
this now, but we were often
referred to as the Samaritan
state, the state that always
wanted to be out there helping
others.
And that gave us a kind of a
entrance over and over
on the ground.
Even when I was working with the
Americans, I could say, let's
go the Canadian Embassy. I
think they'll be able to get us
in where the American Embassy
couldn't, you know, because of
various suspicions or what have
you. So I had many reasons to
really appreciate that Canadian
clout before. I think we have
wonderful people abroad. And I
have to underscore that. I
think our reporters that are
abroad now are as good as any
in history, and I think we
still have some extremely good
diplomats, but we have to
rebuild the strength, you know,
more better, more bureaus and
more more logistical support
all the way through.
>> I want to pick up on the
Samaritan state. I think we're
looking on the inside out. We
can be critical of ourselves
and be extra critical. I'm
curious, what do other
countries do you think view us
as?
>> I think other countries,
from what I gather, you know,
tend to feel that we, we, we
own the podium in a kind of
non-sports way, a non
swaggering way, but in a kind
of diplomatic, friendly way.
And we sort of stepped down
from that podium and were
content to go for bronze again.
You know, there was a time when
Canadian Sports Canada was
known as the bronze medal
nation, right?
Well, we're not anymore.
We're up there often for
gold and silvers and all that.
Well, the same way with
in our journalism and our
diplomacy and the rest of it,
we really were did manage to
get on the podium in the '80s
and '90s through that period and
then gave a lot of it up. So
they think that for a period we
lost focus. We seem to be a
hard country to read. We didn't
seem to have a coherent message
quite often, or we would have a
bumper sticker slogan as a
message and people say, well,
what does that mean, really?
What are you actually going to
give?
What kind of people are you
going to send abroad?
How come you used to have, you
know, 1200 peacekeepers
in the world?
Now you've got 25, right?
I mean, at some stage it becomes
almost a little bit laughable.
Now, having said that, I think
there's a big change in the
Canadian mood that I feel in
the last year. And I think
Canada Canadians want to get
back and know they have to get
back. I really think is very
important. It's not just a wish
to be well-liked. It's a wish
to be influential again, to be
able to be. At the signing of
documents. Notice Canada wanted
to fly into Egypt for the
signing of the cease fire
agreement over Gaza. It you
know, our Prime Minister phoned
up and said, I want to come to
be there. I'm not sure we would
have done that before. So I
think there's much more of
Canada taking a we're in centre
stage again role. And I'm very
impressed by the amount of
media coverage Canada tends to
get now in the last six months
or so. Over that before.
>> How OSAP, I suppose?
>> Yes. Well, that was even
though the elbows aren't quite
as high up as they were. And
yeah.
>> There are places around the
world that got lost in the news
cycle and we can kind of talk
about how inundated people are
with headlines just because of
technology. But what are your
thoughts on what could be done
to help bring attention to
places that are not getting
well?
>> I think I think, first of
all, networks have to be
guilted back into realising,
you know, what you're doing is
ridiculous. I mean, I'll give
you one horrible example that
Ethiopia fell back into a civil
war in recent years for about
three year period when it's
estimated that somewhere
between half a million and
600,000 people died. That's
more people than died in Gaza
and Ukraine combined, yet got
almost no coverage in the media.
Very, very little coverage
except in maybe the British and
Al Jazeera and English and the
French gave it more coverage.
But basically we've turned
we've just gone away from
covering stories because they
seem complex, more costly to go
there. And how would you
support a team in the field?
We don't do front line coverage
in wars like Ukraine anymore,
because the insurance is so
high, and so we were sort of
backing off, covering a lot of
areas of the world. We don't
cover Latin America nearly as
much as we were doing so 20
years ago. This needs to be
explained more, but I think the
networks have to be somewhat
guilted back and guilt
themselves back. And I'm hoping
that this, this whole era we're
going into now where Canada is
really realising we're not just
Canada, US in terms of
importance, we're Canada and a
lot of other countries that we
better get to know about much
more than we do and have been
reporting on in recent years.
And we're scandalously unaware,
really. You know, the big
picture in India or Indonesia,
Latin America, Africa. I don't
think there's a single Canadian
broadcast correspondent in
Africa at the moment, which is
just crazy. So that would help
it. And then then putting the
resources into the coverage,
making the coverage good and
interesting, which foreign news
tends to be. And then at the
base itself, you need
experienced people able to
interpret what's going on in a
lesson. It's always a crisis
mode.
>> Do you think people are
tired or overwhelmed by seeing
images?
Oh yeah. And do you think there
might be reason to?
Why? Maybe.
>> I think that is a massive
problem. I worried even back in
1984, all those years ago, that
the images we were sending out,
at what point would people just
say, you know, I don't want to
live with these kind of images,
you know, I want a better
peaceful images and I can't
fault them, you know?
I mean, there are certain times
when I'm watching images of
coverage from afar where I just
I think I'll miss that tonight.
I'll watch something else.
It's understandable.
It's human nature.
I don't know what.
I don't know what the answer
to that is, except to put more
reporting and less of the image
in, like, you know, I think
longer stand ups by experienced
reporters in the field that are
less the vivid images, but more
the verbal explanation, longer
interviews with people who know
what they're talking about. And
there are so many of those, I
mean, they're always good
experts. Wherever you go in the
world, those things can be more
compelling at times than the
endless images of problems. And
the other thing that I think is
critically important. One
lesson I learned in Ethiopia
was of a very old Irish priest,
came up to me in a feeding
centre and said, you know, you
media are just wonderful at
coming into crises. You run in,
you do three days of footage
and then you fly away again and
you don't come back and we have
to stay on afterwards, of
course. And the world gets an
image that this was a hopeless
country of hopeless people who
never managed to get off their
knees. And you create this
wrong impression of complete
devastation. You're not around
to see people NEIGHBOURS come
back together. Schools reopen,
people form alliances and start
helping each other. You miss
that. So I went back to CBC and
said, you know, he has a real
point, and I think CBC's duty
must be to go back and do
recovery stories a great deal.
And they did. Said they started
to send me back almost every
two years to Ethiopia, where I
could focus on the kind of
things that gave people
encouragement to realise, you
know, these horrible scenes
you're seeing. They need not be
the same scenes six months from
now. If the world responds and
the country is given a chance.
That's why, in a way, I have to
say I'm rather old now. I look
forward to seeing the
rebuilding of Gaza, you know,
not just because it's the most
wrecked place I've ever seen on
Earth, but it's a place that
will show that people can, with
the proper help, come back as
they do come back from so many
places.
>> I want to pick up on Gaza.
Like we've mentioned, you have
been witness to some of the
biggest moments in history.
What do you make of the current
moment that we are in right now?
>> Well, I think we have a
ceasefire. We don't have a
peace agreement. We have a
ceasefire agreement. You could
say it's a small step, but, you
know, all peace treaties begin.
Small people say, oh, well,
it's only a small element. Well,
you have to start somewhere.
And that small element can
become the key building block
down the road. So I try to be
hopeful because I've seen
wonderful, hopeful stories. I
don't want to give people the
impression I've only seen
misery in life. I've seen a lot
of wonderful recovery and new
beginnings life. And, you know,
I think back even to my
childhood as a young child with
Europe recovering from the
Second World War, people do
recover. So I think there's a
lot of difficulty now to go on
to the next phase, the
intervention force. What's it
going to be made of?
Who's going to volunteer to go
into that?
How are you going to bring
a Palestinian Authority
into work with that
intervention force?
How are you going to get Hamas
to disarm?
How are you going to get the
Israelis to fully pull back all
these stage by stage things
that that need a lot of push
and pressure?
And the good thing I feel
what I think is essential is
that finally, all the countries
around are saying, that's it,
we've had it.
This has to stop.
And, you know, it was
very interesting that session
in Egypt when 20 leaders
of nations got together,
because I think that's going
to be needed.
Pressure can maintained
on Israel, pressure maintained
on Hamas as well, that you've
got to disarm.
You've got to leave government.
>> Brian, I have one question
left for you. I know you are
retired now, but clearly you
are not that far removed from
what's happening in the world.
But I have to ask, with all the
images that you have seen, that
you have reported on, when you
go to bed, when you close your
eyes, is there an image that
sticks with you?
>> The image I always fall
asleep to is the shelter people
or myself coming to a warm
shelter and my sound machine?
I have rain outside so they're
coming in from a scary
situation, or a rainy situation
or a turbulent situation, but
they're finding peace and
shelter inside. And I think the
fact that millions of people
can be brought to peace,
shelter and calm can be brought
out of their own nightmares is
something that kind of inspires
me all the time to maintain an
interest in the world.
Otherwise I would have given up.
But boy, I've seen a lot of
evil people in my life, but
also a lot of saints. A lot of
magnificent, heroic people I
write about. And that's what I
like to fall asleep to, is that
comforting image of there's a
shelter in the world for
everybody, right?
>> Thank you so much. I really
appreciate that.
>> Thank you very much.
>> We're building this show for
you and we want you to build it
with us. What issues do you
want to know more about?
What do you like or not like
about what we're doing so far?
Let us know.
Send an email at
therundown@tvo.org
or contact me on Instagram
@jeyanjeganathan and we'll see
you next week.